---
layout: post
title: "Hello, World!"
date: 29.03.2013
comments: true
categories: 
---
Let me introduce myself.  

My name is Yuriy, I live in Lviv, Ukraine, and I'm a software developer.  

I've tried to pick up a title for me for a while and I didn't come with
anything better than 'software developer' - I don't want to tie myself
to things like 'coder', 'tech lead', 'scrum master' or anything similar
- still I was in all that shoes in my career.  

My first commercial job was a Perl coder in 2004 in small outsourcing
company in Ternopil, Ukraine. From there I've switched to Java and now
to Ruby development. Still, that's not a thing I'm really proud about
and which I want to share.  

I would like to write in this blog about modern tools and languages -
especially languages, as I consider learning new programming language as
the most exiting part of a software development. I hope to write about
Scala, Ruby, Haskell - but not limited to ones. Also I'm interested
about bigger things - as long as they are still technical. That said, I
hope to cover software architecture and system architecture in my posts.  

I don't consider this blog as a place for me to share my personal
things. I don't think people that came here to read about, say, Scala,
would care how did I spend my weekends - did I go caving or skiing or
mountain tracking (still this is a usual way for me to spend a weekend).
So don't be afraid to add it to your RSS reader - no porn, no kitties,
no photos with my family. Only software development, only hardcore.  
And the last thing I'm going to write about in this post is to answer a
question - why do I want to have this blog in a first place? Answer is
simple - writing about things helps to organize you minds and knowledge
about that things. Of course, knowing that the blog is useful to someone
would be a great encouragement.

So now lets click Publish - and see what happens next. I hope it will be
something exciting :)
